Add Flax Dropout guide (#2675)
google/flax: docs/guides/dropout.rst

Applying dropout
================

This guide provides an overview of how to apply
`dropout <https://jmlr.org/papers/volume15/srivastava14a/srivastava14a.pdf>`__

> using :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`

Author: Thanks for the catch, added.

Dropout is a stochastic regularization technique that randomly removes hidden
and visible units in a network.

Throughout the guide, you will be able to compare code examples with and without
Flax ``Dropout``.

.. testsetup::

  import flax.linen as nn
  import jax.numpy as jnp
  import jax
  import optax

Split the PRNG
**************

Dropout is a random operation, requiring a PRNG state. Flax (like JAX) uses
`Threefry <https://github.com/google/jax/blob/main/docs/jep/263-prng.md>`__ PRNG

> that is splittable.

Author: ```
Since dropout is a random operation, it requires a pseudorandom number generator
(PRNG) state. Flax uses JAX's (splittable) PRNG keys, which have a number of desirable
properties for neutral networks. To learn more, refer to the
`Pseudorandom numbers in JAX tutorial <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax-101/05-random-numbers.html`__.
```

LMKWYT

("Pseudorandom" is one word, I think - we should fix this on JAX docs)

**Note:** Recall that JAX has an explicit way of giving you PRNG keys:

> you can fork the main PRNG state (such as ``key = jax.random.PRNGKey(seed=0)``)

Author: I agree that it's not common to have the argument name, but just in case some users wonder what `0` stands for (it could be any number), we should keep this IMO.

into multiple new PRNG keys with ``key, subkey = jax.random.split(key)``. You
can refresh your memory in

> `🔪 JAX - The Sharp Bits 🔪 Randomness and PRNG keys <https:/t/jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/Common_Gotchas_in_JAX.html#random-numbers>`__.

Author: I added your suggested link to the JAX 101 tutorial earlier, so let's keep both links. The JAX Sharp Bits is a treasure some users may not be aware of.

Fixed the link 👍

You split the PRNG into keys, including one for dropout, as follows::

  seed = 0
  root_key = jax.random.PRNGKey(seed=seed)
  main_key, params_key, dropout_key = jax.random.split(key=root_key, num=3)

Each of the Flax PRNG streams has a name, such as the ``'params'`` stream for

> initializing parameters, and ``'dropout'`` for dropout.

Author: Good idea.

With some minor refactoring of your suggestion:

```
In Flax, you provide PRNG streams with names, so that you can use them later in
your ``Module``. For example, you pass the stream ``'params'`` for
initializing parameters, and ``'dropout'`` for applying :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`.
```

Defining a model with ``Dropout``
*********************************

To create a model, subclass :meth:`flax.linen.Module`, and then use
:meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` to add a dropout layer. Recall that
:meth:`flax.linen.Module` is the
`base class for all neural network modules <https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#module>`__

> , and all layers and models are subclassed from it.

Author: Just trying to keep each line in this reStructuredText file not too long, and the link is just too long, so it looks like:

```
To create a model, subclass :meth:`flax.linen.Module`, and then use
:meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` to add a dropout layer. Recall that
:meth:`flax.linen.Module` is the
`base class for all neural network modules <https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#module>`__,
and all layers and models are subclassed from it.
```

I am moving the last comma though 😄 Thanks

In :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`, the ``deterministic`` argument is ``None`` by

> default.

Author: Excellent! 

```
In :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`, the ``deterministic`` argument is required to be passed as a
keyword argument, either when constructing the :meth:`flax.linen.Module` or when calling
:meth:`flax.linen.init()`/:meth:`flax.linen.apply()` on a constructed ``Module``.
(Refer to :meth:`flax.linen.module.merge_param` for more details.)
```

> * If it's set to ``False``, the inputs are scaled by ``1 / (1 - dropout_rate)`` and masked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If it's set to ``False``, the inputs are masked (i.e. set to zero) with a probablity set by ``rate``, and the remaining inputs are scaled by ``1 / (1 - rate)``, which to ensure the means of the inputs are preserved.
```

Author: Awesome. Thanks!

Applied with some minor changes:

```

* If it's set to ``False``, the inputs are masked (that is, set to zero) with able
  probability set by ``rate``. And the remaining inputs are scaled by ``1 / (1 - rate)``,
  which ensures that the means of the inputs are preserved.
```

cc @levskaya @marcvanzee The `None` is a bit of an odd default bool for `deterministic` 🤔

> * When it's ``True``, no mask is applied (the dropout is turned off).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When it's ``True``, no mask is applied (the dropout is turned off), and the inputs are returned as-is.
```

Author: 👍  Thanks

> Flax provides an implicit way of handling PRNG key streams via Flax
> :meth:`flax.linen.Module`'s :meth:`flax.linen.Module.make_rng` helper function.
> It allows the code in Flax ``Module``s (or their sub-``Module``s) to
> "pull PRNG keys". ``make_rng`` guarantees to provide a unique key each time you
> call it.
> 

Reviewer: I suggest removing this paragraph since it contains the same content as the next paragraph, and I think the next one is a bit more clear.

```suggestion
```

Author: I think some users may benefit from some repetition. Maybe merging the two paragraphs under one **Note:** may shorten this section:

```
**Note:** Flax provides an implicit way of handling PRNG key streams via Flax
:meth:`flax.linen.Module`'s :meth:`flax.linen.Module.make_rng` helper function.
It allows the code in Flax ``Module``s (or their sub-``Module``s) to
"pull PRNG keys". ``make_rng`` guarantees to provide a unique key each time you
call it. Internally, :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` makes use of :meth:`flax.linen.Module.make_rng`
to create a key for dropout. You can check out the
`source code <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/5714e57a0dc8146eb58a7a06ed768ed3a17672f9/flax/linen/stochastic.py#L72>`__.
```

The internals and `make_rng` is another new guide (idea).

Author: Also, I think @andsteing pointed me to the source code, which is awesome. Some Flax users may find this useful too.

**Note:** Internally, :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` makes use of :meth:`flax.linen.Module.make_rng`
to create a key for dropout. You can check out the
`source code <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/5714e57a0dc8146eb58a7a06ed768ed3a17672f9/flax/linen/stochastic.py#L72>`__.

> * Every time :meth:`Module.make_rng` is called (which is done implicitly in

Reviewer: Dropout does not call this implicitly, it calls it directly.

```suggestion
* Every time :meth:`Module.make_rng` is called (which is done in
```

Author: Thanks! Done.

>   :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`), you get a new PRNG key split from the main/root pseudorandom
>   number generator (PRNG) key.

Reviewer: Maybe write "pseudorandom number generator (PRNG, or simply RNG)" once at the beginning of the tutorial, and then use RNG throughout the tutorial?

```suggestion
  :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`), you get a new PRNG key split from the RNG key that is passed at the top level (see [next section](#add-link) for more details).
```

Author: Thanks for the catch. Not 100% sure how to do section links, so this should do for now:

```
* Every time :meth:`Module.make_rng` is called (which is done in
  :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout`), you get a new PRNG key split from the main/root PRNG key.
```

* :meth:`Module.make_rng` guarantees full reproducibility.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: No Dropout
  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

  class MyModel(nn.Module):
    num_neurons: int

>     training: bool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Author: Good catch! Thanks @cgarciae

    @nn.compact
    def __call__(self, x):
      x = nn.Dense(self.num_neurons)(x)

      return x

  ---
  class MyModel(nn.Module):
    num_neurons: int

>     training: bool
>     @nn.compact
>     def __call__(self, x):
>       x = nn.Dense(self.num_neurons)(x)
>       # Set the dropout layer with a rate of 50%. #!
>       # When the `deterministic` flag is `True`, dropout is turned off. #!
>       x = nn.Dropout(rate=0.5, deterministic=not self.training)(x) #!

Reviewer 2: Ideally we keep passing training state via a call argument as the user can control it via `Module.apply` / `TrainState.apply_fn`, else you'd be forced to either use mutable state (which has pitfalls) or recreating entire `Module` / `TrainState`.
```suggestion

    @nn.compact
    def __call__(self, x, train: bool):
      x = nn.Dense(self.num_neurons)(x)
      # Set the dropout layer with a rate of 50%. #!
      # When the `deterministic` flag is `True`, dropout is turned off. #!
      x = nn.Dropout(rate=0.5, deterministic=not train)(x) #!
```

Author: @cgarciae Can we remind users that they can use both `train` and `training`? This may start getting confusing especially for less experienced users. cc @levskaya @marcvanzee (API design)

Author: > Ideally we keep passing training state via a call argument as the user can control it via Module.apply / TrainState.apply_fn, else you'd be forced to either use mutable state (which has pitfalls) or recreating entire Module / TrainState.

Done. Thanks @cgarciae

      return x

After adding ``Dropout`` to your model, instantiate the model with

> ``training=True``.
> 
> For example, when creating a ``TrainState``, the code will include::
> 
>   my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True)

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention TrainState here since TrainState does not store a module, only the apply_fn.

```suggestion
``training=True`` in order to apply Dropout::

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True)
```

Author: Thanks! Done.

```
After adding ``Dropout`` to your model, instantiate the model with
``training=True`` to apply dropout::

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True)
```

Initializing the model
**********************

> The PRNG key provided to :meth:`flax.linen.init()` is the one that seeds the
> ``'params'`` PRNG key stream.
> 
> Initialize the model with the ``params'`` key::
> 
>   x = jax.random.uniform(key=main_key, shape=(3, 4, 4))
>   variables = my_model.init(params_key, x)

Reviewer: This is not correct. If you construct `my_model` as you did in the previous section, then you should pass an RNG for `dropout` here. I would also explain that you don't need to pass it if Dropout is disabled.

Maybe you can use a side-by-side diff view here as well?

```suggestion
When applying Dropout, you should pass the RNG key for it to :meth:`flax.linen.init()` with name `dropout`. If do you not apply Dropout, you don't have to pass it. Since you are then only passing the RNG for initializing parameters, you can abbreviate ``{'params': params_rng}`` with simply ``params_rng`` (see :meth:`flax.linen.init()` for more details).

.. codediff::
  :title_left: Dropout disabled
  :title_right: Dropout enabled
  :sync:
  
  rng = random.PRNGKey(0)
  data_rng, params_rng, rng = random.split(rng, 3)
  x = jax.random.uniform(data_rng, shape=(3, 4, 4))
  
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=False)
  variables = model_nodropout.init(params_rng, x)

  ---
  rng = random.PRNGKey(0)
  data_rng, params_rng, dropout_rng, rng = random.split(rng, 4)
  x = jax.random.uniform(data_rng, shape=(3, 4, 4))
  init_rngs = {'params': params_key, 'dropout': dropout_key}
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True)
  variables = model_dropout.init(init_rngs, x)

```

Author: Sounds good!

With some minor changes:

```
- If you enable :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` in your model, you need to pass the
  ``'dropout'`` PRNG key together with the ``'params'`` key.
- If you have ``Dropout`` disabled, the ``'params'`` PRNG key is enough for
  :meth:`flax.linen.init()`.

Refer to the :meth:`flax.linen.init()` API docs for more details.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: Dropout disabled
  :title_right: Dropout enabled
  :sync:

  my_model_without_dropout = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=False)

  x = jax.random.uniform(key=main_key, shape=(3, 4, 4))
  variables = my_model.init(params_rngs, x)
  ---
  my_model_with_dropout = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True) #!
  init_rngs = {'params': params_key, 'dropout': dropout_key} #!
  x = jax.random.uniform(key=main_key, shape=(3, 4, 4))
  variables = my_model.init(init_rngs, x) #!
```

Author: Revamped `init()`, etc, no longer using `  init_rngs = {'params': params_key, 'dropout': dropout_key}`.

Performing the forward pass during training
*******************************************

To draw PRNG keys during the forward pass (with dropout), provide a PRNG key to
seed that ``'dropout'`` stream when you call :method:`flax.linen.apply()`.

In your train step, the code will include:

.. codediff::
  :title_left: No Dropout
  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

>   y = my_model.apply(variables, x)
> 
>   ---
>   y = my_model.apply(variables, x, rngs={'dropout': dropout_key}) #!

Reviewer: I would clarify here that you should construct the Module here with the right keyword arguments.

```suggestion
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=False)
  y = my_model.apply(variables, x)

  ---
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True)
  y = my_model.apply(variables, x, rngs={'dropout': dropout_key}) #!
```

Author: Good idea.

```
.. codediff::
  :title_left: Dropout disabled
  :title_right: Dropout enabled
  :sync:

  my_model_without_dropout = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=False)
  y = my_model.apply(variables, x)

  ---
  my_model_with_dropout = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True) #!
  y = my_model.apply(variables, x, rngs={'dropout': dropout_key}) #!
```

> During evaluation, you don't need to pass the ``'dropout'`` key to ``rngs`` in
> :method:`flax.linen.apply()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, the left-hand side is used during training, and the right-hand side during evaluation.
```

Author: Only using the evaluation comment. Added a separate training step section.

> 

Reviewer: I would also explain here that even if you apply Dropout somewhere in a submodule, you still only have to pass the RNG at the top. This is something that users are often confused about.

      x = nn.Dense(self.num_neurons)(x)
      # Set the dropout layer with a `rate` of 50%. #!
      # When the `deterministic` flag is `True`, dropout is turned off. #!
      x = nn.Dropout(rate=0.5, deterministic=not training)(x) #!
      return x

After adding ``Dropout`` to your model, instantiate the model with
``training=True`` to apply dropout::

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True)

Initializing the model
**********************

- If you enable :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` in your model, you need to pass the
  ``'dropout'`` PRNG key together with the ``'params'`` key.
- If you have ``Dropout`` disabled, the ``'params'`` PRNG key is enough for
  :meth:`flax.linen.init()`.

Refer to the :meth:`flax.linen.init()` API docs for more details.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: Dropout disabled
  :title_right: Dropout enabled
  :sync:

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=False)

  x = jax.random.uniform(key=main_key, shape=(3, 4, 4))
  variables = my_model.init(params_rngs, x)
  ---
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True) #!
  init_rngs = {'params': params_key, 'dropout': dropout_key} #!
  x = jax.random.uniform(key=main_key, shape=(3, 4, 4))

>   variables = my_model.init(init_rngs, x) #!

Author: @cgarciae Thanks again. Can we replace `main_key` -> `params_key`?

```
  root_key = jax.random.PRNGKey(seed=seed)
  main_key, params_key, dropout_key = jax.random.split(key=root_key, num=3)
  ...
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3)
  x = jnp.empty((3, 4, 4))
  variables = my_model.init(params_key, x, training=False) #!
  params = variables['params']
```

Performing the forward pass during training
*******************************************

To draw PRNG keys during the forward pass (with dropout), provide a PRNG key to
seed that ``'dropout'`` stream when you call :method:`flax.linen.apply()`.

In your train step, the code will include:

.. codediff::
  :title_left: Dropout disabled
  :title_right: Dropout enabled
  :sync:

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=False)
  y = my_model.apply(variables, x)

  ---
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3, training=True) #!

>   y = my_model.apply(variables, x, rngs={'dropout': dropout_key}) #!

Author: :+1:  Thanks again!

      return x

Initialize the model
********************

1. Instantiate the model.
2. In the :meth:`flax.linen.init()` call, set `training=False`.
3. Extract the `params` from the
`variable dictionary. <https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#module-flax.core.variables>`__.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: No Dropout
  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3)
  x = jnp.empty((3, 4, 4))

  variables = my_model.init(params_key, x)
  params = variables['params']
  ---
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3)
  x = jnp.empty((3, 4, 4))
  # Dropout is disabled with `training=False` (that is, `deterministic=True`).
  variables = my_model.init(params_key, x, training=False) #!
  params = variables['params']

Perform the forward pass during training
****************************************

1. Pass `training=True` to :meth:`flax.linen.apply()`.
2. To draw PRNG keys during the forward pass (with dropout), provide a PRNG key
to seed the ``'dropout'`` stream when you call :method:`flax.linen.apply()`.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: No Dropout
  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

>   y = my_model.apply({'params': params}, x)
> 
>    ---
>   # Dropout is enabled with `training=True` (that is, `deterministic=False`). #!
>   y = my_model.apply({'params': params}, x, training=True, rngs={'dropout': dropout_key}) #!

Author: ```suggestion
  y = my_model.apply({'params': params}, x)

  ---
  # Dropout is enabled with `training=True` (that is, `deterministic=False`). #!
  y = my_model.apply({'params': params}, x, training=True, rngs={'dropout': dropout_key}) #!
```

During evaluation, use the above code with no dropout enabled (this means you do

> not have to pass a RNG either).

Author: ```suggestion
not have to pass a PRNG key either).
```

Initialize the model
********************

* Instantiate the model.
* Next, in the :meth:`flax.linen.init()` call, set `training=False`.
* Finally, extract the `params` from the
  `variable dictionary. <https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.linen.html#module-flax.core.variables>`__.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: No Dropout
  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3)
  x = jnp.empty((3, 4, 4))

  variables = my_model.init(params_key, x)
  params = variables['params']

  ---
  my_model = MyModel(num_neurons=3)
  x = jnp.empty((3, 4, 4))
  # Dropout is disabled with `training=False` (that is, `deterministic=True`).
  variables = my_model.init(params_key, x, training=False) #!
  params = variables['params']

Perform the forward pass during training
****************************************

- Pass `training=True` to :meth:`flax.linen.apply()`.
- Then, to draw PRNG keys during the forward pass (with dropout), provide a PRNG key
to seed the ``'dropout'`` stream when you call :meth:`flax.linen.apply()`.

.. codediff::
  :title_left: No Dropout
  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

  y = my_model.apply({'params': params}, x)

>    ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ---
```

  :title_right: With Dropout
  :sync:

  @jax.jit
  def train_step(state: TrainState, batch):

    def loss_fn(params):
      logits = state.apply_fn(
        {'params': params},
        x=batch['image'],

        )
      loss = optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(
        logits=logits, labels=batch['label'])
      return loss, logits
    grad_fn = jax.value_and_grad(loss_fn, has_aux=True)
    (loss, logits), grads = grad_fn(state.params)
    state = state.apply_gradients(grads=grads)
    return state

  ---
  @jax.jit
  def train_step(state: TrainState, batch, dropout_key): #!
    dropout_train_key = jax.random.fold_in(key=dropout_key, data=state.step) #!
    def loss_fn(params):
      logits = state.apply_fn(
        {'params': params},
        x=batch['image'],
        training=True, #!
        rngs={'dropout': dropout_train_key} #!
        )
      loss = optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(
        logits=logits, labels=batch['label'])
      return loss, logits
    grad_fn = jax.value_and_grad(loss_fn, has_aux=True)
    (loss, logits), grads = grad_fn(state.params)
    state = state.apply_gradients(grads=grads)
    return state

> Flax examples with dropout
> **************************
> 
> * A `Transformer-based model <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/wmt/models.py>`__
>   trained on the WMT Machine Translation dataset. This example uses dropout and attention dropout.
> 
> More Flax examples that use randomness
> **************************************
> 
> * Applying word dropout to a batch of input IDs in a
>   `text classification <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/sst2/models.py>`__
>   context.
> 
> * Defining a prediction token in a decoder of a
>   `sequence-to-sequence model <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/seq2seq/models.py>`__.

Reviewer: Small suggestion: "using randomness" is a bit odd since any ML model uses randomness when initializing the parameters. Also the sst model actually uses dropout, but a custom one, so i would put it under the dropout section.

```suggestion
Flax examples with dropout
**************************

* A `Transformer-based model <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/wmt/models.py>`__
  trained on the WMT Machine Translation dataset. This example uses dropout and attention dropout.
  
* Applying word dropout to a batch of input IDs in a
  `text classification <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/sst2/models.py>`__
  context. This example defines a custom Dropout layer.

More Flax examples that use `make_rng()`
**************************************

* Defining a prediction token in a decoder of a
  `sequence-to-sequence model <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/seq2seq/models.py>`__.
```

Author: Done:

```
Flax examples with dropout
**************************

* A `Transformer-based model <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/wmt/models.py>`__
  trained on the WMT Machine Translation dataset. This example uses dropout and attention dropout.

* Applying word dropout to a batch of input IDs in a
  `text classification <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/sst2/models.py>`__
  context. This example uses a custom :meth:`flax.linen.Dropout` layer.

More Flax examples that use Module ``make_rng()``
*************************************************

* Defining a prediction token in a decoder of a
  `sequence-to-sequence model <https://github.com/google/flax/blob/main/examples/seq2seq/models.py>`__.

```

Thanks @marcvanzee 

Also changed the previous section title from "Training" to "`TrainState` and the training step".
